---
title: On Benjamin and Thought-Images 
desc: A few remarks on the Ninth Thesis
---

During our first meeting, we followed W.J.T. Mitchell's ["Addressing Media"](http://www.mediatropes.com/index.php/Mediatropes/article/view/1771) and asked, "What is the medium of theory?" Here, I want to suggest that Benjamin's medium for "Theses on the Philosophy of History" (or, more accurately, "On the Concept of History") is the "thought-image" or "thinking image" (*Denkbilder*). Before I explain, let me provide some context for the Ninth Thesis, which we discussed yesterday. 

The origin story of the thesis is unclear. It was not published during Benjamin's ("Ben-yum-meen") lifetime, yet it was almost certainly written in 1940, just before Benjamin committed suicide at the French-Spanish border while fleeing from the Nazis. (Prior to that, he was in exile in Paris, which Germany invaded in 1940, and also incarcerated in a transit camp in Burgundy. In September 1940, he planned to sail via Portugal to the States, for which he obtained a visa.) Benjamin's letters to Gretel Adorno suggest he was thinking about the thesis and related material for some time, well before 1940.

Benjamin acquired Klee's ("Clay") *Angelus Novus* (1920) in 1921, and Theodor and Gretel Adorno had a facsimile of it in their apartment. In the Ninth Thesis, Benjamin calls *Angelus Novus* a painting; however, it was a monoprint made using oil transfer. Klee produced the work early in his career, and throughout most of the 1920s he was at the Bauhaus. Like Benjamin, Klee died in 1940.  

Now, if we interpret the Ninth Thesis, we actually have three different angels at play (for more on this position, see Weigel's [*Body- and Image-Space*](http://voyager.library.uvic.ca/vwebv/holdingsInfo?bibId=3221204), especially the chapter titled, "Thought-images"). Benjamin points to Klee's *Angelus Novus* (a monoprint), includes the fifth stanza of Scholem's "Gruss vom Angelus" (a poem), and writes:

"There is a picture by Klee called Angelus Novus. It shows an angel about to move away from something he stares at. His eyes are wide, his mouth is open, his wings are spread. This is how the angel of history must look. His face is turned toward the past. Where a chain of events appears before us, he sees one single catastrophe, which keeps piling wreckage upon wreckage and hurls it at his feet. The angel would like to stay, awaken the dead, and make whole what has been smashed. But a storm is blowing from paradise and has got caught in his wings; it is so strong that the angel can no longer close them. This storm drives him irresistibly into the future, to which his back is turned, while the pile of debris before him grows toward the sky. What we call progress is this storm" (Harry Zohn, trans., [*Selected Writings*, Vol. 4](http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674022294)). 

[Klee's angel](https://www.1000museums.com/art_works/paul-klee-angelus-novus) faces us (without necessarily looking at us), Scholem's angel communicates via the first-person, and Benjamin differentiates between the angel and "us." Echoing Benjamin's other theses, in the Ninth Thesis we see a critique of homogeneous, empty time (e.g., of standardized clocks; see Simmel in [Week 3](https://jentery.github.io/cspt500/)) and historicism and historical wholes, which rely on conventions of the epic (e.g., they are general, not specific) and benefit the victor (see the Seventh Thesis). In fact, we might argue that historicism (as opposed to historical materialism) uses homogeneous, empty time as its *medium* and, more specifically, as its vehicle, conduit, or instrument. Here, historicism's medium is not about matter; time is a force. It is the mechanical or monotonous transmission of abstractions and their corresponding values. It's the wind blowing in the storm called progress. Or, we might just say it *is* progress.   

Brushing against the grain (see the Seventh Thesis) of historicism and homogeneous time, Benjamin's angel of history attempts to arrest or interrupt time with a political philosophy for a history of the oppressed. (On this interruption, I recommend listening to [Judith Butler's 2011 EGS talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dtRwOkGV-B4), especially her discussion of the "now" or "now-time.") While there's significant debate regarding how this interruption occurs, I would argue that its emphasis is on action (see Arendt, in [Week 2](https://jentery.github.io/cspt500/)) and the introduction of change in the present. Such action may differ from other critical modes, such as objectivity or contemplation, even if Benjamin frequently talks about contemplation. As Butler observes, it also corresponds with remembrance and remembrance days (see the Fifteenth Thesis: "Thus the calendars do not measure time as clocks do" (261)). Re-membering would involve, for instance, repetition and heterogeneity (re-compiling the wreckage with constant change, or re-calling an event from multiple perspectives or positions).

Most germane to this seminar, Benjamin frequently mentions images: for example, "The past can be seized only as an image which flashes up at the instant when it can be recognized and is never seen again" (255, the Fifth Thesis). Yet, as Weigel shows in "Thought-images" (46-56), Benjamin's images are neither photographs nor paintings. They are not mental images, either. They are "thought-images" or "thinking images": "constellation[s] of resemblances" (46), which refuse to parse form from content (or container from transmission). In [a compelling interpretation of the Ninth Thesis](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/246499), Robert Lehman describes the approach as a "collection of disarticulated letters" ("Allegories of Rending" 246-7). Building on Benjamin's observation that history is written through citation, Lehman adds, "The *Angelus* sees history . . . without reading it" (247). With these points in mind, we might consider thought-images to be media that critique (or simply respond to) empty, homogeneous time through fragments of writing on the concept of history. As media for historical materialism, these fragments "flash up" against depictions of history "as it really was" (see the Sixth Thesis), as if such depictions are even possible. They arrest continuity as well as perception and are associated with Benjamin's "Messianic time" and "empirical mysticism" (the histories of which we may detail later in the seminar).

Interpreting thought-images as the media of Benjamin's theory is important because it underscores at least three things: 1) the thought-image addresses us; 2) even if it is ephemeral, it flashes up from a material base; and 3) the Ninth Thesis is composed of three *juxtaposed* or *contiguous* pieces (resembling Surrealist parataxis). That is, thought-images speak to us, and we are not in full or even partial control of them. Following Mitchell, we may say they have "faces." For Benjamin, they are media because they at once produce distance and arrest perception (e.g., the fixed stare, wide eyes, and open mouth; see Kristeva in [Week 7](https://jentery.github.io/cspt500/)). While they may emerge from the wreckage, they are not reducible to it. They also prompt attention to historical specificity and reparation against the empty force of progress. For Benjamin (a German-Jewish philosopher writing in France after Germany's 1940 invasion), they are thus central to political praxis and a history of the oppressed (to the introduction of change in the present). However, they are not the sort of revolutionary praxis we may associate with Marxian work at the time, one reason why the Ninth Thesis remains controversial. (Here, see Butler on the difference between remembrance and revolution, including Benjamin's conversations with Bertolt Brecht.) At the threshold between philosophy and poetry, thought-images point to the debris of history in an elliptical or fleeting fashion (see Chun and Doane in [Week 9](https://jentery.github.io/cspt500/)), or they flash and disappear. They are not symbols, either, at least in the sense that they cannot be captured and expressed through objects imbued with life (see Marx on commodity fetishism). And they do not attempt to explain away history as a whole without remainders (see Hegel's articulation of history). By extension, Benjamin's writing, or his angel of history, is not Klee's *Angelus Novus* or even an interpretation of the monoprint. It is a correspondence (or constellation of resemblances) sparked by Benjamin's encounter with Klee's work and the material/social conditions in which he was writing. We might suggest it's not meant to "add up" to a single argument or account, even if scholars such as Lehman suggest it's quite clear.  

All that said, I have quite a few questions about the Ninth Thesis: 

* Where is Paradise? And what is it? Note how the storm blows from Paradise but is also caught in the angel's wings. 
* Is the angel of history itself a thought-image? In what relation to the *Angelus Novus* or "Gruss vom Angelus"? (I would not argue that Benjamin wishes to transcend writing through pictures, but I'm still curious about how to describe the angel of history.)
* How, if at all, does Benjamin's thought-image risk nostalgia or a particular pathos for history? Put differently, does it lack sufficient rationality for praxis? (This is an important question for his historical period, too.)
* Does the pile of wreckage have a discernible form? It grows toward the sky, but does it have an outline or the like? (See Butler's reading of the wreckage as a tower.)
* Is it important whether the angel of history speaks? How, for instance, is the angel a messenger? 
* What is the relation of the angel to humanity? Is the angel in any way human? Where does he reside, if only for the moment? Is he in any way subject to humanity's material conditions (e.g., see the debris hurled at his feet)? (See Weigel, who writes on page 55, "There is, too, an idea of Klee's in a note in his *Paedagogical Sketchbook* [*Pädagogisches Skizzenbuch*] [1925] which could be taken as a comment on his Angelus Novus— 'The human being is half winged creature, half prisoner' (Klee 1990: 100)— a note that follows the pattern of dichotomous concepts of imagination and identity, which in Benjamin’s thought-image of the 'angel of history' is wrenched from its paralysis as a metaphor of existence and set in motion of a kind that, in the representation of non-synchronicity, does not seek resolution in reconciliation.")

*These are notes for the seminar. Please excuse any typos or errors. If you see any, then please bring them to my attention. Thank you!*
