---
title: Final Portfolio 
desc: A review of what to include
---

This seminar is based on a portfolio model of research, where you write throughout the term and revise your work at the end. The portfolio should include seven response papers (no more than 1000 words each), six of which you should submit (via Google Drive) prior to the exams period (no later than December 2nd). The first six response papers will receive marks (Batch 1 and 2) and should be revised during the term and, if you wish, during the exams period, too. (That is, you can revise them after they are marked for the first time; in fact, I encourage you to revise them after they are marked). The portfolio should be accompanied by a “cover statement,” which is detailed below, together with your seventh paper. 

## Seventh Paper
Your seventh response paper should address a specific gap in the course outline by identifying two authors who were not included but whose work contributes to our discussions (e.g., they address gaps in the material). For this particular paper, I recommend selecting one publication (or excerpt) by each of your two authors. This way, you don’t tackle too much for a short response. Of course, this particular paper requires research beyond the assigned reading. Thanks for your patience here. I recommend engaging material that interests you in some way; perhaps you’re reading it for another project (e.g., your MA essay, dissertation, or community-based project). 

## Cover Statement
Your portfolio (seven response papers) should be accompanied by a cover statement, which should detail (in 500-1000 words) your own position on the relevance of “media” and “materiality.” This position should stress the everyday functions of the concepts and readings from seminar: how they may influence your own work, writing, research, communications, politics, social relations—whatever you deem most relevant. The cover statement can be written in the first person, and it should privilege the use of theory (not its analysis). Feel free to mention some readings from seminar (definitely not all of them), but don’t feel obligated to dissect or deconstruct them. Again, you should stick to use, or the function of theory in everyday lived experience. If you’d like, then also feel free to define “media” and “materiality” in your own terms. I recommend workshopping your cover statements with peers in the seminar: read them aloud, comment on them, revise them, and spend time on word choice and the articulation of positions. The cover statement should be written with a broad audience in mind: educated non-experts (in and beyond the academy) who may be familiar with critical theory but may not care about it, read much of it, or write about it. For such an audience, you’ll want to choose your words carefully, avoid name-dropping, quote material deliberately, write eloquently, and communicate how theory works for you (and perhaps others, including your communities) as part of your lived experience. 

## Important Details 
* Your second batch of response papers is due no later than Friday, December 2nd.
* Your entire portfolio is due no later than Monday, December 19th. 
* The portfolio should be submitted via Google Drive as a single document.
* The portfolio should contain seven response papers (presented in chronological order, staring with the first paper you wrote and ending with the last one you wrote). 
* Each response paper should be no more than 1000 words.  
* The portfolio should be accompanied by a cover statement, which appears at the beginning of your Google Drive document (that is, before all of your response papers). 
* The writing in the portfolio should be concise and polished. Each response paper should be revised at least once, but presumably more than once. The statement, too. My expectations of the writing in your portfolio will be higher than during the term. 
* In December, please email me to notify me when your portfolio is ready to be assessed.  I would like to submit grades for CSPT 500/600 by December 20th.  
